---
layout:     series
title:      "Notation"
date:       2024-10-02
categories: blog probability-distributions
permalink:  ":categories/:title/"
part:       1
series:     probability-distributions
tags:       probability-distributions
---

This stuff is going to get pretty tedious and it's important to have very precise notation. All of the following is standard notation in probabilty theory and statistics. Some of the notation may seem pedantic, but I promise it's all there for a reason. Also be warry of the symbol $p$. It is overworked and often used to refer to very different things.

- Capital letters at the end of the alphabet such as $X, Y, Z$ are typically refering to random variables, while lowercase letters at the end of the alphabet such as $x, y, z$ are usually refering to a particular value of these random variables
- $P(X = x)$ means the probability that random variable $X$ is equal to the particular value $x$. I think this notation is an artifact of old notation, even though other notation means the same thing.
- If $X$ is a discrete random variable, then its probabilty mass function (PMF) is given by $p_X(x)$. The subscript is to differentiate the PMF of $X$ from the PMF of $Y$ which would be given by $p_Y(y)$. Note that other sources will use the functional variable to distriguish the PMF, i.e. $p(x)$ vs $p(y)$. I choose to be a little more explicit.
- If $X$ is a continuous random variable, then its probability mass function is given by $f_X(x)$.
- For both discrete and continuous random variables, the cumulative mass function (CDF) is given by $F_X(x)$, presumably because $P$ was already taken.

For parameters, we will use the following notation

- parameters will be either lower case variables towards the beginning or middle of the alphabet, such as $a, b, c$ or $p, q$ (yes sometimes $p$ gets used as a parameter rather than as a function. But since I am using the subscript notation you will always know which is which), or greek letters such as $\alpha, \beta, \gamma$
- If a random variable $X$ depends on parameters $a, b, c$, then its PFM will be written as $p_{X \vert A, B, C}(x \vert a, b, c)$ read as "the probability of $x$ _given_ $a, b, c$".
- $\mathrm{E}[X]$ denotes the expected value of random variable $X$. Again, if $X$ depends on parameters, then we will write $\mathrm{E}[X \vert A= a, B=b, C=c]$.
- Likewise, $\mathrm{Var}[X]$ or $\mathrm{Var}[X \vert A=a, B=b, C=c]$ denotes the variance of random variable $X$.